[OCEAN WAVES]
>> What if consciousness
on Earth is evolving?
What if we can participate
in the evolution
of our own consciousness?
What if an evolutionary
leap in our consciousness
is essential if we're
going to survive?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We're going to
have to make very,
very radical changes in our
approach if we want to continue
this human adventure.
>> I can't imagine that the
global crisis would be solved
unless there is some kind of
a deep inner transformation
and movement to another
level of consciousness.
>> We have the
opportunity to wake up,
become lucid of ourselves.
>> It isn't just that this is
a story about something out
there.
This is actually a
story about ourselves.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Sri Aurobindo is a major
systematic philosopher who had
experienced directly
the ecstasies,
the expanded consciousness, and
the supernormal capacities that
he describes.
And he gives a
general map, as far
as I'm concerned, of the way
forward for the human race.
Sri Aurobindo sees the
entire cosmic advance
as a progressive disclosure
of the divine nature, which
involved itself in the Big
Bang, in the creation of matter
itself.
>> Among scientists that reflect
on the universe as a whole,
there's widespread consensus
that what we see today could
not have happened by
chance or by accident.
There are
self-organizing dynamics
in this universe that
brought this forth.
One way to understand
this is to say
that if we looked
at the universe,
it was entirely accidental and
random, after 14 billion years,
it would only have a
few complex molecules.
Nothing like life.
Nothing like a
planet that's alive.
Nothing, nothing.
Widely accepted
among scientists.
As opposed to think that
the universe is dead matter,
we begin to suspect
that it's actually
permeated with intelligence.
Our wisdom would be a
form of intelligence
that is highly
effective in bringing
about what it's aiming for.
The struggle is, then
what does it mean?
What does it mean?
There are different
interpretations,
and I am simply saying
that one interpretation is
that the universe itself
knows what it's about.
The universe is
unfolding in a way
that eventuates in complexity,
eventuates in beauty,
eventuates in different
forms of consciousness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So from the beginning
the universe
was in a rush to bring
forth its deepest dreams.
[SEAGULLS CALLING]
>> In the beginning,
there's molten rock.
It begins to cool, and
if we could do time lapse
photography, suddenly
rock would become
Beethoven and Sri Aurobindo
and beautiful children playing
and art, and all of the
things that we consider
to be the highest
value suddenly,
mysteriously, pop
out of molten rock.
Now tell me that's an accident.
Once you see life
appear in the cosmos
and you know something
about how finely tuned
the physical forces are, you
can see that life is somehow
intended by the cosmos.
But it's woven in, folded in,
involved, that life is already
involved in matter, in
the cosmos as its subtler
deeper intention.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If matter is rushing
towards life,
then life seems to be rushing
toward something else, which
we could call consciousness,
and that its most
actualized level, wisdom,
compassion, love, insight.
>> If we observe a material
process of evolution,
we can also observe a
process of gradual evolution
of consciousness.
So that the more and more
complex forms of nature
allow the possibility
of expression
to more and more complex
forms of consciousness.
>> In Sri Aurobindo's yoga,
it's the consciousness that has
created all of this
that is emerging.
So there is a one consciousness,
the divine consciousness,
which has put itself as
in a seed into matter
and is blossoming
out of matter slowly
in the course of evolution.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The first flowering of
consciousness seems to involve
the awakening of the cosmos
to the sheer fact of its own
beingness.
And we see this in language,
in the creation of images
and stories and myths.
So it's as though through
consciousness and culture
and symbols, the cosmos
starts to awaken to itself,
that it is.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If the goal of the Earth
is to awaken to itself
as a self-conscious
being with higher urges
and desires and
aspirations, then it
might be the case
that humans are
the vehicle for that awakening.
>> This view of evolution of
consciousness basically is
about divinization
of our earthly life,
of transformation of our
earthly existence into a divine
and spiritual existence.
And there seems to be a crucial
period in each person's life,
sooner or later, that we
call a spiritual awakening.
It hardly ever is a pleasant
and smooth unfoldment.
Rather, it's challenging.
It could involve different
encounters with pain,
with suffering,
life-changing events.
>> I'm 51 now, and I
got sick 20 years ago,
in the form that
it looks like now.
And until I got sick I
didn't have any concept
of a spiritual path.
So the name that was given to
me is chronic fatigue syndrome,
and it was like becoming
retired and experiencing
old age at the same
time, at the age of 30.
I believe illness
can catalyze one
through the process
of initiation
and open us up to
something else.
It does feel like an initiation,
what I've been going through.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you want to progress, then
you're going to be faced with
situations that force you
to look a little deeper,
to turn a little
higher, to ask for help,
or to find some hidden
resources within yourself,
some courage you
never knew you had.
>> I wonder what am I
going to be asked to do.
What am I being asked
do that I haven't done?
My youth was kind of taken away.
Boom, gone.
So that, by definition, is
a spiritual kick up the bum,
you know?
It really catalyzes you to
ask all those big questions,
who are you and what am I?
>> What if humanity's gift is
just for the universe to be
able to experience
itself through us?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If we think about
the idea that we
were created by the
universe, created
through plants and
animals, and then we
got to be human, if we're the
ones thinking about ourselves,
thinking about being
alive, then it's almost
like the universe gets to
see itself through our eyes.
It's a weird thing
to think about.
>> We are products of nature.
We are representatives
of universal nature
through which something seems
to be trying to move forward
to a higher stage.
Something that's been
pushing unconsciously
through all those billions
of years of development
since the Big Bang, and we don't
see why this process should
be expected to suddenly
stop in the middle
where we are now, at such
an unsatisfactory level
of half achievement.
And there must be higher levels
of consciousness preparing
to express themselves.
>> There's an innate pressure
of nature to move ahead.
It's the basic
force of evolution.
So we are all learning.
We are all growing.
We are all, in some
way, trying to improve.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So then the question arises
as to what is the next step?
What we can achieve by
means of analysis and reason
are actually very
small steps when
we look at the vastness
of the entire creation.
And this is where Sri
Aurobindo's vision comes in,
and he hints at a higher
level of consciousness,
or even higher levels
of consciousness.
And these will include
the possibility
of finding the truth
by other means,
and not by rational means.
>> We have to call on the
next step in evolution,
the next power that will
govern human consciousness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> From a spiritual point of
view, the mind has limitations,
even though it is the apex
of current stage of evolution
on our planet.
>> The ultimate spiritual
quest is for the truth,
and in science, also,
we seek the truth.
The limitation is
that in science we
can only operate with the mind.
What happens when
we pursue science
is that the mind develops,
and in developing, it
begins to find its
own limitations.
It finds that reason and logic
cannot take it everywhere.
In particular, it cannot unify--
it cannot find a unified truth.
At that point, what happens?
Either it can give up, or
it can decide for itself
that there has to be some
other faculty that is required.
And there, the answer is
something that the mind,
I think, cannot get for itself,
although it can think, perhaps,
of the nature of evolution till
this point, and think that,
therefore, there has to be a
further stage of evolution.
>> We think-- we used to
think-- no longer, I think--
a human being thought that his
intelligence was the highest.
It governed and
guided everything.
Just because we where
at a certain moment,
as mental beings, at
the summit of evolution,
it presumed there was nothing
beyond and nothing other.
Not that the mind or the
reason are laid aside,
we find a greater,
another function
in this totality
of consciousness.
>> The mind is our
best tool so far,
so that is our favorite tool.
But still it's not good enough.
You need something that
goes beyond the mind.
And somewhere deep inside,
we have that knowledge.
Well, the mind contradicts
it, because on the level
of the mind, you cannot find it.
The mind is largely
instrumental.
It is something
that has to be used
by a deeper knowledge, a deeper
truth, by an inner faith.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We have to take
this next step.
We have to evolve into a
greater state of consciousness.
And I believe that there
is part of who we are
that knows exactly what to do.
So the trick is accessing it.
>> The point of getting more
thoroughly engrossed in this
adventure of consciousness is
to be conscious of oneself.
To be conscious of all
that arises in one's self.
>> When I got sick, the
challenge was you have
to ground into your very
being, into your center.
You have to listen to
every single impulse that
is coming from your mind,
your body, your spirit.
And I'm still
learning to do that.
The encouragement is
just to constantly
bring me back to
what is essential,
what's root, the root
meaning of everything,
the root reality of everything.
>> This world is a reality.
It's not an illusion.
But the reality of the world
is still hidden within.
It's still withdrawn
within matter,
within our consciousness,
within our minds.
>> In those rare moments
where, as an individual,
I or somebody else goes into
a deeper place in oneself,
from that deeper place, the
world is entirely different.
And the way that we shift
as individuals, the way
that our consciousness
shifts, is
going to recreate
the world differently
from instant to instant.
>> The physical world will be
very different when our mind is
different, because the
physical world that we see is
our constriction.
It has the colors it
has because the way
our mind is constructed.
It has the number
of dimensions that
is there because
our mind is made
like that, and so on and so on.
So what is real
depends, actually,
on where our
consciousness is located.
If I'm totally engrossed
in reading a book,
the reality that's
described in that book
has become my reality.
I'm part of the story.
So our mind has
always that capacity
to create a world in
which we then live.
All the time, we're actually
creating our reality.
But it is an automatic
process, so we have no control.
>> It's like we all went to
the movie theater and we got
so involved in the movie that
we forgot that we were watching
the movie.
And this is sort of
what's happening here.
When things happen to us to
shock us out of that state,
to step out of that
state of consciousness,
we realize there are these
other states of consciousness
that we can access.
[SIRENS]
>> Since we last filmed last
year, I've had a stroke.
And it bled down into
the cervical vertebrae
and paralyzed me
from the neck down.
>> It seemed at first that
it wasn't so terrible.
And then within a
week it had morphed
into the shadow of death.
>> There's been these
huge experiences,
like being mute
for three months.
Most of the doctors were
quite convinced that I
would be fully quadriplegic
for the rest of my life,
and probably ventilated.
>> I was told she
would never recover.
She would never come
off a ventilator.
She would never regain movement.
>> I no longer have the
trach, as of last week.
I was ventilated
until a few weeks ago.
And that was the first
big step that happened.
And I also started to regain
movement in my right side.
I do hold on to that I
am being led somewhere.
It almost feels like a sense
of purposeful unfolding.
I've been seeing it more clearly
with this experience recently.
I've often felt like I'm
on a shamanic journey,
and this feels very,
very much like that.
>> The question is, can
spiritual awakening be
a collective process?
Can the world go through
a similar process
as an individual might go in
their own personal journey?
And the answer is,
potentially, yes.
>> It's quite common
for deep transformations
of consciousness to require a
kind of near-death experience.
And that, in fact, is what we
and the entire earth community
are on the verge
of experiencing.
>> There are different ways
to talk about our moment
and the magnitude of
what's taking place.
Here's one of my favorites.
It's that we are
entering the moment when
Darwin's theory of evolution
is no longer correct,
in this sense.
Our decisions now are
more fundamental even
than natural selection
in shaping the earth.
We live in that
time in a crossover,
when our human consciousness
and the decisions it's making
becomes the primary shaping
force of all of life.
The universe evolved in
a certain way up to us,
and now we are going to
change the actual evolution
of a planet.
It's a major change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The global climate, which
had been more or less stable
for the past 10,000 years,
as we know, is changing.
It's warming at alarming rates.
There's all kinds of evidence.
About four fifths of the world's
original forests are gone.
About 80% of commercial
fish stocks are gone.
The polar ice caps are
melting at alarming rates.
Sea levels are already rising.
A mass extinction of
species is underway.
The signs are very, very grave.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So many tipping points
seem to have been passed.
>> The perversities of the
system that exist today are
right up in our face, and we
have these life-threatening
situations.
We do need to make change.
The question is, does
it have to get worse
before it gets better?
Can we avoid the pain
in making that change
or do we have to go
through a painful period
in order to make the change?
>> One of the greatest
influences in my life was
[INAUDIBLE] and he talked
about how all life goes through
stages where it gets to a
certain point where it can't go
any farther, either physically
or consciously, mentally,
and at that point
there's a mutation.
We adapt, we mutate, we change.
The force of life is such
that it's so powerful
that when we come to
one of these crux points
where we're either
going to change
or we're going to
become extinct,
something happens to
take us to the next step.
And those crux points are
usually really stressful.
>> We have to remember
that the crisis,
the crises that we're
experiencing and that
we're causing are
paradoxically, at the same time,
the very means through
which we are awakening.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One way or another, either
we change into something else,
or we are not going to make it.
>> Here we are, we're faced
with this ecological disaster.
With the best will
in the world, what
are you going to do about it?
We're being presented-- it's
a koan, you know it is a koan.
In Zen, the master
asks you a question
or tells you a story just to
blow your mind to smithereens
so that you're in
another consciousness.
So in a way you could say the
present state of the world
is like that, and all of us
are faced with these koans.
>> All life challenges have the
potential to be transformative.
If you actually
take a deeper look
at problems and
challenges, we see
that they are key to our
growth, to our evolution,
and therefore to the larger
evolution of consciousness.
>> I'm learning a lot about
surrender through this process.
So a day or two after
it first happened,
I had a profound
moment of surrender.
It came very easily.
I surrendered
completely, and it helped
me have that deep sense of
surrender to something larger.
I had a preconception
that surrendering
meant peace of mind.
And I certainly did
experience that initially,
but I'm now questioning that.
Is it possible to
feel grief and fear
and still be in the
state of surrender,
just to let go of the individual
struggle, to let go of control
and to let go, to let go?
>> We can only create something
different when we let go,
but it requires a kind of
surrendering and an opening out
to something vaster,
within which we all exist,
within which all this creation
is continuously happening,
because then something different
begins to incarnate in us
and we become the instruments
for a different kind
of creation.
>> The question now
comes at the process.
How can we make our
evolution, which we witness,
a matter of conscious pursuit?
Can we not work
upon processes so
that we feel that drive we
have leading a life which
is directed consciously,
which is not tumbling along
by the force of circumstance?
>> The previous step from
the animal to the man,
the animal did not have the
kind of mind that could provide
the aspiration and that could
provide a conscious help
to the process.
So that was largely an
involuntary process.
Now we can make it
a voluntary process,
and the more we make
it a voluntary process,
I think, the faster it will go.
Now when we deliberately
wish to contact the higher
consciousness, it is necessary,
then, to point in the mind.
And a developed mind that
knows its limitations
is a willing partner in
the widening of itself.
We know from science that when
large scale ideas of synthesis
have arrived, most often they
have arrived subjectively.
Most often they have arrived to
some sort of an intuitive link.
We know that these ideas
come when we are perhaps
indulging in some activity
where the mind is relatively
quiet, such as, perhaps,
driving or gardening or things
of this sort.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It is my hope that by
practicing meditation,
by practicing the art
of silencing the mind,
that we will gradually
begin to have access
to higher consciousnesses.
>> Now we have to get something
that's entirely beyond mind,
that works on the basis of
silence, of a direct knowledge.
We are all the time busy, we are
all the time doing something.
What if we just let all that go?
Just be silent in
your mind so that you
can watch your own thoughts.
Maybe the next step
of consciousness
is not thinking at all.
Maybe it is the
power of harmony.
We have to understand that in
the end we are still all one,
and part of one
big game together.
We are living at a crucial
and dangerous time,
that we are individual, very
powerful, very confused, very
limited in our understanding.
And we can do a
lot, but we are very
limited in our
understanding of how
the whole thing hangs together.
So that is our most
urgent task at the moment,
how to get the
consciousness that
is in harmony with the
consciousness of the world.
You get a tremendous
joy of individual life.
All that joy of
existence is there
because we have that
individualized consciousness.
Now we have to go
to the stage where
it becomes also
harmonious, so that we
have the beauty of
the harmony and also
the joy of that individuality.
And one way of doing that is
just getting the basic idea
that our lives don't
have, actually,
much of an external
purpose, but are largely
for us to change in
our consciousness,
slowly becoming wiser,
becoming more in harmony
with the consciousness that
supports this immensely
complex creation.
So it is an unlucky in-between
stage that we are in,
but it is an in-between stage.
It is not a final thing.
>> We've done it this way to the
point of destroying ourselves
and destroying the earth.
Perhaps we can do
it differently.
Perhaps we can look
at it in another way.
And that's what the contribution
of a creative person can do.
They like to look at everything
from a different angle, out
of the box, looking at it
from a different perspective.
Artistic expression
of the creative mind.
The creative mind that is vast.
The creative mind
that is limitless.
And we cannot progress
without the creative mind.
It's impossible.
The function of art is to help
us evolve as human beings.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Artists, in their artistic
reverie and using imagination,
look down the time track
and sense what we can be.
Artists have always
been this way.
>> As an artist, I open myself
to a process of unfolding
of inner phenomenon.
Then I have an opportunity to
get in touch with something
that is much bigger than
myself, much bigger than what
my consciousness
can even comprehend.
>> I believe that everything
that we've ever invented,
every art, has come from
another state of consciousness.
And if we're not going to
just be copyists and copy
whatever art everybody
else is doing,
we have to let go
and find the means
to be able to enter into
that ocean of consciousness.
And it's from that place
that the art comes.
>> The ingredient
is the open mind.
Being open to surprise.
Now, this openness might bring
a lot of fear for some people
because it's a fear
of the unknown.
What is going to happen,
is submitting oneself
to the mystery of
what might happen.
But that's is the spark.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The best of art,
certainly, is spiritual.
It actually, I think,
comes from the source.
The highest artistic
performance, I think,
is a situation where the
artist is really channel
for cosmic creative energy.
And the highest forms of art,
I think, are definitely divine.
They're coming
from divine source.
They're not human made
in the ordinary sense.
Mozart, whole
symphonies appeared
in a finished form in his head.
He just ha to write it down.
Or Puccini said I didn't
write Madame Butterfly.
I was just holding the pen.
It was created by God.
>> When we as humans experience
a piece of art that has come
from that state, we
know it instantly.
It registers in that
place within us.
>> It becomes a means for us
to have a spiritual experience.
You know, witnessing some
kind of beautiful piece
of architecture like Taj
Mahal or Gothic cathedral
and listening to
a piece of music,
those are all
activities, I think,
that can induce spiritual
experiences in a very, very
powerful way.
It was both coming
from the divine source
but also mediating access to it.
>> There is a kind of spiritual
experience that one can have
that feels ultimately real.
That feels-- some experience
of the spirit, a sense
of infinite consciousness.
And we need to take a higher
step in the evolution.
We need to go to a spiritual
consciousness, something which
is going to be truly able
to comprehend the unity that
underlies us, and
it's not just simply
to escape out of
the world, but it
is to be an embodied
spiritual consciousness
here in the world.
>> Spirituality, I think
it's a very private affair
and it's something that
depends on experience.
And it's based on recognition
of our higher nature.
Somehow we are more
than we think we are.
We can experience ourselves as
something much larger and much
higher, much more
beautiful than we
are aware of in our everyday
state of consciousness.
>> There are actually
different ways of finding that
consciousness that goes beyond
our ordinary consciousness.
All spiritual traditions have
talked about those things,
and we can get to a space that
is impersonal, vast, infinite,
empty.
And you do that by
rising above the mind,
literally, in the sense
that the chakras are
one above the other.
There is another way.
And that is going
deep inside the heart.
There also, you'll
find something
that's way beyond your
small individuality.
>> Most of the transformative
processes have something
in common, and that is often
a person that undergoes such
processes is able to reach
deeper within themselves
to a place that they
did not know before.
The question is
what is that place,
and what can we call that?
I like the word
soul, in the sense
that it means our innermost
center of individuality,
a place of connection
with the divine,
and a place that can help us
harmonize the entire psyche
and personality.
The soul is the locus of
the evolving consciousness
in a human being.
So attaining soul
consciousness is
a key step in the process
of spiritual unfoldment.
>> Sri Aurobindo suggests
that deeper within,
we are a spiritual being who has
come here upon earth in order
to participate in this
evolution of consciousness.
So here we are.
And this spiritual being
works through our soul.
Our soul is a portion
of the divine being
that has descended into
this evolution and stands
behind our life and
throws out its intimations
to us, but from behind a veil.
>> It's like a kind of layer
that separates us from a deeper
core, which is
certainly more divine.
There is a layer of this dark
energy, that kind of separates
us from who we really are.
So there's something
that we can work through,
that we can transform.
If you go deep
enough, you really
find that there is genuine
sense for beauty, discovery
of the divine within,
that we have that higher
ideal even if we
don't necessarily
completely impersonate it.
>> I think most of
us have some sense,
some experience of
the soul behind.
Many of us have had some
kind of promptings of that,
have had some glimpses
that there was some greater
realities, that something
seems to be guiding
the things that are occurring
in our life in some way.
>> What is that little voice
in you that knows what's right
and wrong?
How do you make that stronger?
There are little
basic things that
can help us to become more
aware of that inner source
of knowledge.
And it is this that
collectively we have to develop.
And they're very subtle,
they're very small.
Just an inner awareness,
kind of gentleness inside.
Being a little more quiet,
little more listening.
If you go deep inside, you
feel close to the divine.
You feel his nearness,
or her nearness,
or you feel love for the divine.
It has the same aspect
of absoluteness,
it has the same aspect of
infinity, but it is personal.
>> I know that I have an
internal knowing about where
I'm supposed to be and
what I'm supposed to do.
I know that I have a
sense of what that is.
And yet I find it's really
difficult for myself
to be willing to listen
to my inner wisdom.
And I haven't really
found a practice yet
to notice and hear it fully,
except in the moments when
I love going to the ocean on
foggy days, when it's raining,
and putting my feet
in the wet sand
with the ocean and the rain.
And somehow that
complete stillness,
the wateriness of the ocean
and the wildness of the rain
somehow gives me
access to something
that I don't normally have.
[OCEAN WAVES]
>> In many different schools
of spiritual practice,
there is a shift, a refocusing
of our energies on our heart
center, which is not only the
center of our inner wisdom,
but it is also the connection
point between all beings
and each being
with the universe.
So the heart and love
become a central focus
in this process of spiritual
unfoldment and evolution.
It's really important to
wake up to that love that
is the true nature of our soul.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The evolution of
consciousness has to do with
noticing how much
love already exists.
Not just within
us, but also that
we're receiving
constantly from the world.
Every plant that gives off
oxygen so I can breathe,
that's a gift of love.
It's like someone giving up
the seat on the bus for me.
It's a gift of love.
>> Service is, I think,
often us being vessels,
individuals as being
vessels of divine love.
And the amount of
love that has come
to me through this
experience has been extremely
overwhelming and extraordinary.
I've had to learn a lot about
receiving and surrendering
to receiving love from others
to this degree, is new.
>> Love essentially
means attraction,
and divine love is what
connects us to all other souls,
and what holds the
entire universe together.
So tapping into the essence of
this love on a personal level,
in the deepest sense,
means also tapping
to its universal expression.
>> Love, if that's really
who we are at our core,
the deeper we can
understand that,
the more we can participate
in the rest of the universe,
in its evolution, and our
own evolution simultaneously.
>> I would say love,
like the light,
in the fundamental
sense, ananda,
is that from which all
creatures are born,
is that in which
we live and move,
is that into which
we are evolving.
>> The special experience
is essentially that of love.
Love is the guiding light of
our true spiritual unfoldment.
I don't think that
spiritual development
is meaningful without love.
[OCEAN WAVES]
>> When something like
this happens, and by this,
I mean the stroke, it shows you
what is essentially important,
which is love.
And it always
comes back to that.
>> The love that we're able to
transmit to each other now has
gone to a whole
different level of depth.
It's heightened my perception
of the preciousness of love
and of being together and of
the time we have together.
When I'm feeling
love, I come out
of a contraction
into an expansion,
a larger sense of self, and
a dissolving of boundaries.
>> We have to evolve into a
greater state of consciousness,
a state of consciousness
that creates a bond with all
the other lifeforms on Earth.
>> We are ready to reach out
to a greater consciousness.
What will it be?
It has to be a whole,
something which
can identify with the whole
almost by becoming one with it,
yet see all the details
of the structure.
>> I have been involved
now, over half a century,
studying certain category--
an important subcategory
of non-ordinary states
of consciousness,
where people have experiences
that we call transfersal,
which is basically identifying
experiences with other people,
identifying with other species,
most animal and even plant
consciousness.
They realize how embedded
we are in nature.
We are integral part of nature.
>> There are leaps in
evolution, certainly,
and when Sri Aurobindo talks
in terms of consciousnesses,
he certainly talks about leaps.
And he has mentioned that we
will be able to study objects
by becoming that object.
This will come through
identity, that whenever
we want to study some object, we
can in fact identify ourselves
with that object.
Now we cannot, at this stage,
visualize what that means.
>> I remember walking to
the temple for meditation
and looking at a
flower and a bee,
and having this complete
experience of the fact that I
felt no separate from them,
like I was somehow experiencing
the bee as myself and the flower
and myself all at the same
time.
And it didn't last long,
and it was mind-blowing.
And I feel like I've spent most
of the past few years trying
to remember what that felt
like as a way of maybe trying
to figure out what it would be
like in the future for humans,
if the evolution
of consciousness
goes in a way to where we
actually can experience
simultaneously the
one and the many.
I like to imagine it would
be a process of me somehow
feeling completely unified
with all of existence,
and at the same time,
also knowing myself
as an individual being.
>> In these more intense states,
you feel the other person.
You sense that you and
I are one and separate.
This is the great
apparent paradox.
>> Christ said love your
neighbor as yourself,
and everybody finds it more or
less equally impossible to do.
But one of the aims is really
to experience your neighbor
as yourself in the one.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So the sense of the oneness,
of the whole, the wish
to respect all
creatures, to respect
the earth as our mother, we
find traces of it everywhere.
>> What if the evolution forward
is a combination of everything
from the past that has been,
as well as what we are now,
and what we will be,
all at the same time?
[CELTIC MUSIC]
>> Every human civilization on
Earth has been going through
its own special growth process.
That's part of the whole
overall evolution of humanity.
So if we listen and
learn from each other,
then we'll find that we've all
passed down bits of the puzzle,
means to be able to
take the next step.
>> Despite appearances, we
are essentially one body.
We share the same flesh, the
same breath with every living
being on this planet.
We know that we all
come mysteriously
out of molten rock.
We know that we have
a common destiny.
>> Human beings somehow have a
sense of where they are going.
Deep inside of us,
we have already
the knowledge of the
tools that is evolving.
So I think it is
very, very urgent
that people start paying
more attention to how
to collect a higher
knowledge, a deeper love, how
to collect more wisdom.
>> I think that the deep
intuitive wisdom comes from
the whole of me, like
all parts of me together,
which is connected
to the larger whole.
Historically, one
of the ways that I
have connected to
my intuitive wisdom
is through the
use of a pendulum.
That's the main way
I access that kind
of daily intuitive wisdom.
When I was in the hospital
and I was paralyzed,
I had to find another
way of doing it.
And interestingly, I
imagined doing the pendulum,
using the pendulum.
And it was hard, but I did it.
And in terms of the
intuitive process,
I don't find it as easy to
connect to myself deeply
as I used to.
But there's a bit
of a paradox there,
because on the other hand,
I think that I am actually
in that space more, because a
lot of my cognition and memory
and intellectual abilities
have been eroded.
>> Well, it seems
all of us are, then,
somehow on this journey of
remembering our inner wisdom.
It's a lifelong practice to
find your inner guru again,
because so many of us
seems to have lost it.
The evolution of
consciousness maybe
can only really take
place when all of us
come back towards ourselves.
>> Modern culture has developed,
through modern science,
all sorts of insights that
earlier cultures simply did not
have.
But we've lost, say, a lot
of these yogic practices.
Someone like Ramana
Maharshi, sitting
in the depth of
realization, see,
I've never met someone who
kind of glowed in the dark
like he did.
People would come from
around the world just
to watch him read the newspaper.
You'd get stoned
just watching him.
I mean, it was contagious.
>> There's people in India,
if you go traveling around,
and you can meet some
individuals who have these kind
of extraordinary inner powers.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I had the very, very great
privilege of coming to the Sri
Aurobindo ashram in Pondicherry
at the age of seven or eight
with my parents.
Sri Aurobindo was still there
in the body when I was there.
And we were the first
children to see Sri Aurobindo
in the body, was a present.
I was very young, but I
was absolutely fascinated
and galvanized by just
standing in front of him.
There was a
consciousness and a power
and a presence that
even a child could feel,
and that I still carry.
>> One of the things that Sri
Aurobindo has told us is that
we are living--
we today, we are
living at a kind
of transition point in evolution
and that the past achievements
of all the great
civilizations, including
the Western materialist
one, we should see them
as contributions towards
a future worldwide culture
in which all would be
harmonized into a much
more integral approach.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> To use the word
integral is very strong.
How do we arrive at it?
It's not an attempt at
harmonizing, putting things
together.
But it is reaching a level of
consciousness and experience
where you see the whole.
And in the whole, the
distinctivenesses,
the uniquenesses are
obviously present,
because they
constitute the whole.
So it is being at a
level of consciousness
where the whole emerges.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We're not able to
experience or manifest integral
consciousness unless
we experience wholeness
and integrality in our psyche.
And the question
is how can we bring
all the different aspects of
our being into a unified whole?
And the agency for
doing that is the soul.
>> Integral spirituality is a
matter of living one's inner
truth as far as possible.
It's really up to
each individual
to live as fully as possible
his own truth, his own relation
with the supreme reality,
however it presents itself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> All aspects of my being
are being changed in some way,
transformed in some way.
But it's like the drip,
the slow drip onto rock.
There's all these
limitations and losses
that the stroke
has created, and I
think that the journey
through illness
is asking me to
mature spiritually.
It's asking me to lay down
all the things that one
uses to build one's identity,
one's work, one's family,
all the roles one plays
in life, those things
are kind of taken away.
So it's like a realization
that identity is--
it's just not based
on those things.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I feel different.
[LAUGHTER]
I just feel different.
I'm changed as a person.
>> If we as individuals open
out to a deeper possibility
and if we're tapping
to something deeper,
then that changes
the whole equation.
It completely reorients
one's psychology
and one's interaction
with the environment
and one's sense of
what's possible.
>> I've seen people
changing radically.
People develop an
attitude to life
which is more like
martial arts, or more
like surfing through life, and
an unusual synchronicity there.
People find out
that they actually
achieve more with less
effort the co-operative way.
It's more becoming
part of a stream.
And the things that they do
bring personal fulfillment,
but also are good for
collective, for a larger whole.
There is a dissolution
of boundaries,
a sense of planetary belonging,
rather than belonging
to a particular
culture or country.
It is almost like a
different kind of species
that emerges out of this work.
>> One can easily imagine a far
more beautiful type of being
than what we are.
And so whether we
either morph into it
or leave this world to
another kind of creature,
how much does it matter?
We need to get to a more
beautiful creation, that's
for sure.
>> We've committed
to changing this.
It has to change.
The world should
not be like this.
And we want to
access whatever power
is out there in the universe
that can help us to do it.
And for that we have
to change ourselves.
>> Our challenge is to find a
way to reconstruct the human,
to reinvent the human so that we
participate with the enveloping
intelligence and wisdom
that gave birth to us.
The universe is this 14 billion
year evolutionary event,
and we're part of that.
>> A rhythm of the universe
is in a sense, a totality.
And we're not going to
be allowed to stay put.
>> We are being called to assume
our destiny as evolutionary
beings, and that means raising
evolution itself to the level
of consciousness.
And we must do it consciously
for evolution on this planet,
at least, to continue.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) Blessed be
your journey back home
to the essence of who you are
Acting from the soul, we must
Let's start, my love to wake up.
We can no longer
walk in circles,
harvesting the
same consequences.
Everything urges for a new dance
In harmony with life, conscious
Deeper, higher, conscious
Accessing the power, conscious
Love is the unifier, conscious
We're more than we think we are.
Conscious
Deeper, higher, conscious
Accessing the power, conscious
Love is the unifier, conscious
We're more than we think we are.
[EXHALING]
Conscious.